---
layout: default
title: Historiography of the American Revolution 
subtitle: Interpreting the War for Independence 
author: Andrew Schumann
date: 2021-12-16
toc-blurb: For centuries now, historians have debated the causes and character of the American Revolution to better understand the nation’s founding. People, places, and documents associated with revolution are frequently scrutinized from nearly every ideological lens. As a result, the American Revolution itself has been characterized differently in each subsequent generation’s historical writings. The historiography of the American Revolution, then, serves as a case study in how political divisions within society produce dueling historiographical paradigms. Even today, debate rages on over how the Revolution and the Founding Fathers ought to be represented in our history.

toc-image: schumann-delaware-crossing.jpg
toc-section: thematic 
---
{:.abstract}

For centuries now, historians have debated the causes and character of the American Revoluion to better understand the nation’s founding. People, places, and documents associated with revolution are frequently scrutinized from nearly every ideological lens. As a result, the American Revolution itself has been characterized differently in each subsequent generation’s historical writings. The historiography of the American Revolution, then, serves as a case study in how political divisions within society produce dueling historiographical paradigms. Even today, debate rages on over how the Revolution and the Founding Fathers ought to be represented in our history.

NOTE: This project is not intened to showcase a teleological evolution of American historiography, nor is it a comprehensive account of every historigraphical interpretaion of the American Revolution. Rather, it is a metahistorical survey meant to highlight how some influencial historians have characterized the Revolution since the colonial period. The date ranges for each section are based on the publication years of said historians major works, and they are intened only to give a sense of the relative influence of certain historigraphical schools of thought. Over time, historigraphical interpetations begin to overlap and converge, further complicating how we teach ourselves about our nation's foudning.  

# 1781-1829: Early Histories 

The initial histories of the American Revolution were written by those who lived through the events of the war and published works in the late eighteenth and early nineteenth centuries. These early histories featured starkly different characterizations of the revolution and its participants, unsurprisingly shaped by the authors differing allegiances during the conflict. 

## Revolutionary Interpretation

Among the first histories to be composed in the aftermath of the Revolutionary War was [__David Ramsay__](https://www.mountvernon.org/library/digitalhistory/digital-encyclopedia/article/david-ramsay/)’s *The History of the American Revolution* (1789). Ramsay was intimately involved with the events of the Revolution, serving as a surgeon in the Continental Army and later a delegate to the Continental Congress from South Carolina. His writings portray the revolution as “__a mass of husbandmen, merchants, mechanics, and fishermen… guided by the leading strings of the mother country__… [in] a situation that needed the abilities of all its sons,” resulting in “a vast expansion of the human mind.” (Ramsay 315) In the vein of Enlightenment historiography, Ramsey argues that the American Revolution pushed humanity forward by actualizing an emerging philosophy of government centered on individual liberty. Ramsay also touched on how the Revolution acted as a unifying cause for what were previously disparate peoples, thus creating a truly American identity for the first time.

Notable as the first female historian of the American Revolution, [__Mary Otis Warren__](https://www.britannica.com/biography/Mercy-Otis-Warren) offered a similarly  positive view of the war. Like Ramsay, Warren involved herself heavily in revolutionary effort, publishing satirical plays and pamphlets which mocked royal authority in Massachusetts. In her *History of the Rise, Progress, and Termination of the American Revolution* (1805), Warren declares that “__Future generations will… never forget the energetic struggles of their fathers to secure the natural rights of men__…established in the United States by a race of independent spirits who have freed their posterity from the feudal vassalage of hereditary lords.” (Warren 647) From this, it is clear that the presence of righteous American patriots and their immoral British rulers that was so common in Warren’s dramatic compositions carried over into and historical writings. 
 
{% include figure.html
  class="center"
  width="75%"
  caption="_The Declaration of Independence_ by John Trumbull (1819). A veteran of the Revoluionary War, Trumbull portrays the signing of the Declaration as a momentous occasion in the advancement of mankind.
  image-url="schumann_declaration_signing.jpg"
  source-url="[https://commons.wikimedia.org/wiki/File:Washington_Crossing_the_Delaware_MET_DP215410.jpg](https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/John_Trumbull#/media/File:Declaration_of_Independence_(1819),_by_John_Trumbull.jpg)"
%}

Evident in both Ramsay and Warren’s histories is the concept of __the American Revolution as a profoundly moral event__, taken up by righteous American patriots who ushered in a new era of human development by eschewing European rule. Crucial to this historical framework is the **interjection of a moral arc to history**, with revolutionaries and loyalists cast as heroes and villains respectively. Equally important is the **construction a new national identity**, deliberately forged as a method of rallying the citizens of the newly independent United States. 

## Loyalist Interpretation 

Of course, historians favorable to the British published their own histories of the American Revolution once the conflict concluded. Notable among these authors was [__Thomas Hutchinson__](https://www.britannica.com/biography/Thomas-Hutchinson), the former royal governor of the Massachusetts Bay colony and subject of many a prodding pamphlet produced by Mercy Otis Warren. In his writings, Hutchinson __justified the British policies that generated discontent within the colonies__, including the [Stamp Act of 1765](https://www.britannica.com/event/Stamp-Act-Great-Britain-1765), asserting that such measures were necessary to reduce the debt accrued from [French and Indian War](https://history.state.gov/milestones/1750-1775/french-indian-war). In his *Detailed Narrative of the Origin and Early Stages of the American Revolution*, Hutchinson also makes note of the distinct feeling of betrayal brought on by the revolution, recalling “__All of a sudden, the officers of the crown__, and such as were for keeping up their authority, __were branded with the name of Tories, always the term of reproach.__” (Hutchinson 4) Given his role as a royal authority, Hutchinson predictably takes umbrage with the hero-villain dynamic featured in revolutionary histories, instead offering a loyalist account which justifies the controversial acts of Parliament and questions the colonial distain for the crown. 

While Hutchinson used historical narrative to excuse the acts of the British, other loyalist historians focused on the harmful exploits of colonial revolutionaries. In his *Origin & Progress of the American Rebellion* (1829), [__Peter Oliver__](https://www.encyclopedia.com/history/news-wires-white-papers-and-books/oliver-peter-1713-1791) details “__the distresses of some of those people who, from a sense of their duty to the King and a reverence for his laws__, have behaved quietly and peacably, and for which reason they have been deprived of their liberty, abused in their persons, and __suffer’d such barbarous cruelties, insults, and indignities beside the loss of their property by the hands of lawless mobs and riots__ as would have been disgraceful even for savages to have committed.” (Oliver 3) Behooved to write such an angry account largely as a consequence of his own personal loss, having been forcibly removed from his post as a Justice in Massachusetts Bay, Oliver casts the American Revolution and its supporters in an exceedingly grim light, __depicting revolutionaries as a violent mob intent on spreading chaos and destruction__.

Whether defending the actions of the royal authorities or condemning the activities of colonial revolutionaries, loyalist interpretations illustrated in the works of Hutchinson and Oliver showcase a markedly antagonistic representation of the American Revolution and its supporters. Loyalist writers also tended to moralize history, but in the adverse direction of their revolutionary counterparts. As such, the **early historiography of America’s founding reveals how the political divisions between colonial historians cultivated dueling historical paradigms, both of which featured moralistic condemnations of their opponents.**

# 1830-1889: Whig Histories

For the bulk of the 19th century, Whig historians – labelled after the conservative political movement of the same name – wrote and promoted histories of the American Revolution. These works built on the revolutionary histories of prior scholars, but with heavier emphasize on __providence__ and __nationalism__. Whig histories are fundamentally _romantic works_, often embellishing the events of the revolution to offer a __heroic image of the Founding Fathers__ and instill in readers the sense that the __United States is a uniquely exceptional country__. 

{% include figure.html
  class="center"
  width="75%"
  caption="_Washington Crossing the Delaware_ by Emanuel Leutze (1851). A famous nineteenth century painting depicting Washington as courageous and stalwart in the face of war."
  image-url="schumann-delaware-crossing.jpg"
  source-url="https://commons.wikimedia.org/wiki/File:Washington_Crossing_the_Delaware_MET_DP215410.jpg"
%}

These themes are best observed in the writings of [__George Bancroft__](https://www.britannica.com/biography/George-Bancroft-American-historian), an American statesmen and avid antiquarian, who published a comprehensive, multi-volume set of books entitled _The History of the United States from the discovery of the American continent_ (1854–1860). Bancroft’s History paints the American Revolution as a divine inspired event headed up by men of legend. In early chapters, Bancroft details the exceptional nature of the American colonists which spurred them toward revolution: “The idea of __freedom had never been wholly unknown; [but] in America it was the breath of life to the people.__ For the first time it [freedom] had found a region and a race, where it could be professed with earnestness and defended with enthusiasm.” (Bancroft 22) Later, Bancroft details the character of those historical figures who made the revolution possible: “__Washington was a man of action__… Integrity was so completely the law of his nature, that __a planet would sooner have shot from its sphere, than he have departed from his uprightness.__” (Bancroft 398). Throughout the text, Bancroft weaves religious allusions into his telling of the revolution. This is well illustrated in his description of the first revolutionaries to die in the conflict: “Seven of the men at Lexington were killed, nine wounded…these village heroes prove[d] by their spirit that they were a race divine; from the example of Him who laid down his life on the cross for the life of humanity…” (Bancroft 294-5)

From __describing Geroge Washington as a perfect paragon of virtue__ to __comparing the sacrifce of revolutionary soldiers to that of the Crucifixion__, Bancroft's work is perhaps the best example of how __Whigs imbued their histories with an evangelical and nationalist ideology__. Beyond their historiographical importance, Whig histories contributed to a number of 19th century cultural developments, including the [Second Great Awakening](https://www.britannica.com/topic/Second-Great-Awakening) and [Manifest Destiny](https://www.britannica.com/event/Manifest-Destiny). It would not be until the turn of the century that Whig histories were seriously challenged. 

# 1889-1950 Imperial School 

Toward the end of the 19th century another strain of historiographical thought emerged, dubbed the “Imperial School.” A new crop of historians, including Charles McLean Andrews and Lawrence Gipson re-oriented the study of the American colonial period, writing their histories from the perspective of British policymakers. Harkening back to the Loyalist histories of old, __imperial histories depict the American Revolution not as a rebellion against a tyrannical monarch, but instead as the inevitable result of reasonable imperial policies which the American colonies defied__.

In a seminal article on colonial history in the _Annual Report of the American Historical Association for the Year 1898_, [__Charles M. Andrews__](https://www.britannica.com/biography/Charles-McLean-Andrews) became the first historian to __consider the British perspective of the colonial period__ in nearly a century, explaining that “__our colonial history has been written from but one point of view - that of the  colonies__…  that is, we have neglected the standpoint of the mother country,  of which we were a part. __We have left largely unexamined the system which English statesmen elaborated for the management of ourselves__ in their interest… “(Andrews 49) In later works, Andrews would suggest __English statesmen continued to enforce standard imperial policies__, including various taxes to compensate for monetary losses during wartime, __because they were unable to comprehend the growing revolutionary fervor within the colonies__: “Few contemporaries in England realized the danger lurking in a persistent attempt to enforce such policies… or imagined that the methods of interference adopted after 1763 would be so far resented in the colonies as to bring about an eventual breach.”(Andrews 376) 

One of Andrews’ students, [__Lawrence H. Gipson__](https://gipson.cas.lehigh.edu/lawrence-henry-gipson), would later expand on these works and further develop the Imperial School. In an article for the March 1950 issue of _Political Science Quarterly_, Gipson argues that the __American Revolution amounted to a side effect of Britain’s victory in the [French and Indian War_](https://history.state.gov/milestones/1750-1775/french-indian-war)__, which “not only freed colonials for the first time…from the dread of the French, their Indian allies, and the Spaniards, but [also] __opened up to them the prospect, if given freedom of action, of a vast growth in power and wealth through westward expansion.__” (Gipson 102) In other words, Gipson suggests that Britain’s victory over the French in 1763 inadvertently caused the American Revolution by offering colonists in North America a vision how beneficial independence could be. Taken together, the work of Gipson and Andrews paints a much more nuanced image of the American Revolution. Instead of a noble uprising against a tyrannical ruler, as the Whigs portrayed it, __historians of the imperial school thought of the Revolution as an unintended consequence of British colonial policy__. The Imperial School held sway over the upper echelons of academic thought for some time, with Gipson even being ironically awarded the [Bancroft Prize](https://library.columbia.edu/about/awards/bancroft.html) in 1950, but it was not the only school of thought to challenge the traditional histories of America’s founding during the 20th century. 

# 1908-1968: Progressive School

Concurrent with the Imperial School in the early to mid-twentieth century was the rise of the Progressive School, named after the [Progressive Era](https://www.loc.gov/classroom-materials/united-states-history-primary-source-timeline/progressive-era-to-new-era-1900-1929/). Scholars of this orientation critiqued traditional histories of the American Revolution by __emphasizing economic interests, challenging the myths behind the Founding Fathers, and placing historical focus on ordinary colonists__. Put another way, progressives attempted to __debunk the Whiggish romanticism__ typical histories of the Revolutionary War included, instead offering a more realistic and __critical history__ of the nation’s founding. 

American historian [__Carl Becker__](https://www.britannica.com/biography/Carl-Becker) was among the first to shape the progressive interpretation of the Revolutionary war when, in his 1915 work _The United States; An Experiment in Democracy_, he proposes a __dual revolution theory__. While Becker admits the primary struggle during the American Revolution was between the Colonies and the Crown for the right of self-government, he asserts “there was also another phase of the Revolution, and that was __the struggle within the Colonies themselves between the little commercial and landowning aristocracies that had hitherto governed the Colonies and the "people," the unfranchised "humble folk,"__ who now were coming to demand a measure of political equality.” (Becker 35) Maintaining that the Revolution began as an external political dispute, Becker further explains that evolved into an __internal economic dispute__: “…and thus the struggle against Parliamentary taxation came to be identified with the struggle against a privileged class in the colonies.” (Becker 45) This focus on class interest would go on to define the Progressive School of thought, and later authors would prove even more assertive in their critique of the usual historical narrative. 

Another early adopter of the progressive approach was historian [__Charles Beard__](https://www.britannica.com/biography/Charles-A-Beard), best known for his controversial work _An Economic Interpretation of the Constitution of the United States_ (1913), which reads more akin to a political treatise than a straightforward history. Beard insists that the Founding Fathers were motivated not by philosophical ideals, but by material and economic interests, declaring “__whoever leaves economic pressures out of history or out of the discussion of public questions is in mortal peril of substituting mythology for reality…__” going on to proclaim “It was largely by recognising the __power of economic interests in the field of politics__ and making skilful use of them that the Fathers of the American Constitution placed themselves among the great practicing statesmen of all ages and gave instructions to succeeding generations in the art of government.” (Beard 17) In other words, Beard claims that the only reason the American Revolution occurred and the Constitution formulated is as a result of __wealthy statesmen protecting their economic interests__. Beard further substantiates this claim by remining readers which groups lacked representation at the Constitutional Convention: “__the slaves, the indentured servants, the mass of men who could not qualify for voting under the property tests imposed by the state constitutions and laws, and women, [all] disenfranchised and subjected to the discriminations of the common law… [and] therefore, not represented in the Convention which drafted the Constitution.__” (Beard 24) In a blistering critique of traditional histories, Beard contends that the American Revolution and later the writing of the Constitution __reified existing economic hierarchies__.  

The progressive interpretation continued to produce critical histories up until the mid-twentieth centuries, wherein historians like [__Merrill Jensen__](https://alphahistory.com/americanrevolution/historian-merrill-jensen/) __stressed the role of the common man__ in the American Revolution. In his _Articles of Confederation : An Interpretation of the Social-Constitutional History of the American Revolution_ (1940), Jensen characterizes the War of Independence as “an internal revolution carried on by the masses of the people against the local aristocracy.” (Jensen 14) Moreover, he disputes the long held notion that the Founding Fathers were champions of liberty, explaining: “as time passed and bitter experience taught them, the fathers of the Revolution repented of their radical beliefs and became conservative... Such men as George Washington, James Wilson, Robert R. Livingston… had more to fear from the people of the colonies than from British legislation.” (Jensen 92) By reframing the Revolution as a popular __uprising against aristocratic authority__, and __redefining the role of the Founding Fathers as opportunistic__ instead of heroic, Jensen offers a decidedly critical history of the American Revolution with all the hallmarks of the progressive interpretation, from a emphasis on __economic interests__ to the __de-mythologizing of revolutionary figures__. 

# 1942-1967: Ideological or Neo-Whig Histories

In response to the economic determinism of the Progressive School, certain historians developed an alternative historiographical approach based on considering how Whig tradition and republicanism contributed to the American Revolution. In contrast to the Progressive School, these writers argued that __rhetoric and ideas__ were more than just propagandistic and in fact functioned as the driving force of the revolution, __emphasizing the role of revolutionary thinkers__ like Thomas Jefferson and James Madison. While less jingoistic than their nineteenth century counterparts, conservative historians in the mid-twentieth century are referred to as Neo-Whigs, given their __focus on the Founding Fathers__ and the role of [__Whigism__](https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/Whiggism) in the American Revolution. 

[__Douglas Adair__](https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/Douglass_Adair#:~:text=He%20is%20best%20known%20for,the%20era%20of%20the%20Enlightenment.) offered one of the first ideological histories of the American Revolution in his 1942 dissertation, _The Intellectual Origins of Jeffersonian Democracy_. Largely in response to Charles Beard’s body of work, Adir argues that __political philosophy guided the actions of the Founding Fathers__, not their economic interests, saying of the Progressives: “What observers from this viewpoint have almost incredibly turned their backs upon is __a source of influence on both Madison and Jefferson__, confessed and discussed and emphasized in the letters, speeches, and miscellaneous writings of their two lifetimes. This source is __the vast impact of classical traditions of political theory__ on two of the most widely read and scholarly statesmen America has ever known.” (Adair 12) Using their writings as reference, Adair postulates that the Founding Fathers used classical political philosophy as a presage to their own political happenings, quipping “Those members of the Constitutional Convention who had forgotten the lines of Polybius they had studied in school would have found John Adams' fat volume on government a ready source of reference.” (Adair 90) By __redefining the role and character of the Founding Fathers as gentlemen scholars__, Adair helped to transform the American Revolution from a purely economic conflict to an indisputable __ideological clash__. 

Ideological histories would later be spearheaded by [__Bernard Bailyn__](https://www.neh.gov/about/awards/national-humanities-medals/bernard-bailyn), author of _The Ideological Origins of the American Revolution_ (1967). While Adair had reframed the Founding Fathers and rejected Progressive economic determinism, Bailyn’s histories denote how __Whigism served as a primary causal factor in the American Revolution__. When describing the ideas cited eighteenth century revolutionary pamphlets, Bailyn describes how “Just as the colonists cited with enthusiasm the theorists of universal reason, so too did they associate themselves, with offhand familiarity, with the __tradition of the English common law__… manifestly influential in shaping the awareness of the revolutionary generation.” (Bailyn 30-1) He goes on to note how the construction of American government proved dependent on learning from __Whig traditions__, explaining “How to qualify, undermine, or reinterpret tenets of English political theory was the central intellectual problem that confronted the leaders of the American cause… starting in the struggle with England over the extent of Parliament's power and continuing into the debates on the ratification of the Federal Constitution…” concluding “It is a classic instance of __the creative adjustment of ideas into reality.__” (Bailyn 202) Through describing how English Whigism helped develop American [__republicanism__](https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/Republicanism_in_the_United_States), Bailyn affirms the important __role of ideology in the American revolution__. 

# 1968 - 1990 The New Left and Social History

With the influence of ideological histories, as well as the arrival of the Cold War, assumptions of class antagonism gradually began to fall out favor with many American historians. Coinciding with the rise of the [__Civil Rights Movement__](https://www.britannica.com/event/American-civil-rights-movement) and [__Second Wave Feminism__](https://www.britannica.com/topic/feminism/The-second-wave-of-feminism), left-wing histories in the late 1960s and onward focused more on __social history__. 

[__Jesse Lemisch__](https://www.historians.org/publications-and-directories/perspectives-on-history/december-2018/jesse-lemisch-(1936%E2%80%932018)) was among the first to tackle the web of social history in the Revolutionary period. In a 1968 article for _William and Mary Quarterly_, Lemisch unearths the colonial attitude toward “Jack Tar,” an old English slang term for merchant seaman, stating “Thus __if we think of Jack Tar as jolly, childlike, irresponsible, and in many ways surprisingly like the Negro stereotype, it is because he was treated so much like a child, a servant, and a slave__…the society that wanted Jack dependent made him that way and then concluded that that was the way he really was.” (Lemisch 380) He goes to discuss the role of impressment, the frequent practice of enlisting men into naval service by force, as a cause of revolutionary sentiment in the colonies, asserting “Impressment had played a role in the estrangement of the American people from the British government. It had produced “odium” against the navy, and… the anger of thousands of victims did not vanish.” (Lemisch 395) By __tapping into the lived experience of common folk__ in the colonial period, __examining the laws and attitudes which policed their daily lives__, Lemisch showcases the insights that can be revealed using the __“history from the bottom”__ approach. This methodology would motivate several prominant left-wing histories going forward, including _A People’s History of the United States_ (1980) by [__Howard Zinn__](https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/Howard_Zinn), one of the most widely recognized social histories of this era.

Other historians elected to use social history to reveal the unexamined experience of women and minorities during the Revoluion. [__Mary Beth Norton__](https://www.historians.org/about-aha-and-membership/aha-history-and-archives/presidential-addresses/mary-beth-norton/mary-beth-norton-biography) sought to understand the __evolution of women’s political and social lives__ in colonial America. In a 1980 article for the _American Historical Review_, Norton discusses how “the revolutionary years brought accelerated change to the lives of American woman and children…” citing revised widow rights, new statues to end unwilling martial unions, and increased premarital pregnancy rates (implying greater sexual expression). She goes on to interpret these changes as “related to __the effects of the American Revolution on women’s consciousness__…as the result of assuming previously “male” responsibilities in the absence of men during the war.” (Norton 615) Other left-wing histories elected to focus on the role of __race and ethnicity__ in the American Revolution. [__Gary Nash__](https://www.historians.org/publications-and-directories/perspectives-on-history/december-2021/gary-b-nash-(1933%E2%80%932021)) posited in _Race and Revolution_ (1990) that “Neglect of the black freedom struggles that occurred in revolutionary and postrevolutionary America has turned the African American fifth of the population into a far more passive group than it actually was…” and that “__In reality, the American Revolution represents the largest slave uprising in our history.__” (Nash 49). In his analysis, Nash stresses that __the Revolution offered black Americans the unique opportunity to assert their independence through the same ideology of protest the colonists used against the British__, detailing how free black groups in the Northern colonies formed their own mutual aid societies and spiritual communities, meanwhile slaves in the Southern colonies organized into guerrilla bands that terrorized patriot farms. In other words, Nash argues that black Americans were fighting for a revolution of their own, at times even fighting alongside the British (who had a general policy of offering freedom to escaped slaves). Quoting fellow historian [__Vincent Harding__](https://www.thehistorymakers.org/biography/vincent-harding-41), Nash concludes with __“the children of Africa, whose freedom the Constitution makers sacrificed on the altar of a tenuous and limited white unity,” were the Americans who “pressed the nation toward its highest possibilities”__ by holding the colonies to their revolutionary promise. (Nash 64) 

The histories written by Lemisch, Norton, and Nash delve into the __revolutionary experience of groups who previously were left out of the mainstream historical narrative__. Their work signals a distinct historiographical shift based on writing __history based on the experiences of everyday people__, but especially concerning the voices of historically oppressed groups. __Unearthing silenced narratives__ has continued to be a primary feature of left-wing histories to this day. 

# 1990-Present: The Continuing Debate

## Founders Chic

Near the turn of the millennium, __biographies of prominent revolutionary figures__ become a popular trend in American historiography. These works have been written primarily, although not exclusively, by conservative historians, and tend to parrot a __founder-based beginning__ of the nation. Critics have labeled the trend “Founders Chic,” and derided the trend for its limited scope and often embellished narratives. Prominent examples of such works include [__Joseph Ellis__](https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/Joseph_Ellis)’ _American Sphinx_ (1996), which covers in glowing detail the intellectual and political achievements of Thomas Jefferson. When pressed in a Frontline interview on Jefferson’s sincerity on the issue of slavery, which he occasionally lambasted despite being a slave owner himself, Ellis responded simply “__No, Jefferson is almost always sincere, even when he contradicts himself__.” (Ellis) Another example is [__H.W. Brands__](https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/H._W._Brands)’ _The First American_ (2000), a thrilling and poignant narrative concerning the life of Benjamin Franklin. When assessing the Founders Chic trend in a 2003 [op-ed](https://www.theatlantic.com/magazine/archive/2003/09/founders-chic/302773/) for _The Atlantic_, Brands reminds readers that ““The one trait the Founders shared to the greatest degree is the one most worth striving after today—but also one that is often forgotten in the praise of their asserted genius. These men were no smarter than the best their country can offer now…They were, however, far bolder than we are.” Concluding that “__For their courage they certainly deserve our admiration. But even more they deserve our emulation__.” (Brands) In fairness to each of these authors, their biographies are well-researched, carefully presented, and far more nuanced than Whig or even Ideological histories. Nevertheless, their work reflects __a renewed fascination with placing prominent, typically privileged, individuals at the center of the nation’s history__. 

## Social Justice, Power, and the Real Revolution 

In recent decades, left-wing historians have furthered the study of revolutionary America by incorporating elements of progressive, social, and postmodern historiography into their narratives. These histories tend to be __scathingly critical of traditional Revolution narratives__ and usually underscore issues of __social justice and power dynamics__. Essential to a discussion of recent left-wing American historiography is the [__1619 Project__](https://www.nytimes.com/interactive/2019/08/14/magazine/1619-america-slavery.html), an ongoing initiative by the _New York Times_ aiming to “__reframe the country’s history by placing the consequences of slavery and the contributions of black Americans at the very center of our national narrative.__” (NYT) On the eve of the project’s launch in 2019, lead researcher [__Nikole Hannah-Jones__](https://www.nytimes.com/by/nikole-hannah-jones) penned an [article](https://www.nytimes.com/interactive/2019/08/14/magazine/black-history-american-democracy.html) arguing that “__Our democracy’s founding ideals were false when they were written. Black Americans have fought to make them true.__” (Hannah-Jones) She references Crispus Attucks, a fugitive slave and a victim of the Boston Massacre, notable as the first person to die in the American Revolution, and “…yet he gave his life for a new nation in which his own people would not enjoy the liberties laid out in the Declaration for another century…” (Hannah-Jones) Concluding with the consequences of the Revolution on black Americans, she declares “Conveniently left out of our founding mythology is the fact that __one of the primary reasons some of the colonists decided to declare their independence from Britain was because they wanted to protect the institution of slavery__,” going on to explain that “The wealth and prominence that allowed Jefferson, at just 33, and the other founding fathers to believe they could successfully break off from one of the mightiest empires in the world came from the dizzying profits generated by chattel slavery…” (Hannah-Jones) In addion to uncovering silenced narratives, Hannah-Jones’ efforts in the 1619 Project reveal how __social power dynamics influence historical narratives, thereby reifying social inequality__. Contemporary left-wing histories attempt to alter those dynamics by reframing our historical narratives, arguing that __the real revolution occurs within the writing of history itself__. 

# Conclusion

Discordance is baked into the structure of American government, and there is no shortage of disagreement in daily American life. It only makes sense, then, that the ongoing struggle for historical interpretation has found in the American Revolution one of its most fruitful battlegrounds. This battle has involved numerous forms of historical discipline including political, economic, intellectual, social, and biographical works. The one constant between these varied texts is an ideological pendulum, showcasing how historians of dueling political beliefs respond and react to one another’s arguments across centuries. If there is one lesson to gleaned from this project, it is that __the historiographical debate over how to interpret and characterize the American Revolution will persist unabated for as long as the nation itself carries on__. 

## Bibliography

Ramsay, David. [*The History of the American Revolution*](https://dl.tufts.edu/concern/pdfs/sb397m82f). Liberty Fund, 1789. 

Warren, Mercy Otis. [*History of the Rise, Progress, and Termination of the American Revolution*](https://oll.libertyfund.org/title/warren-history-of-the-rise-progress-and-termination-of-the-american-revolution-vol-2#lf0025-02_head_016). Liberty Fund, 1805.

Oliver, Peter. [*Origin & Progress of the American Rebellion*](https://americainclass.org/sources/makingrevolution/rebellion/text2/oliverloyalistsviolence.pdf). National Humanities Center, 1781.  

Hutchinson, Thomas. [*The History of the Province of Massachusetts Bay: From 1749 to 1774, Comprising a Detailed Narrative of the Origin and 
Early Stages of the American Revolution*](nationalhumanitiescenter.org/pds/becomingamer/growth/text9/massachusettsgovernor.pdf). National Humanities Center, 1829.

Bancroft, George. [*The History of the United States from the discovery of the American continent*](https://quod.lib.umich.edu/cgi/t/text/text-idx?sid=f4a084131b45cb9c164118768cbb9c80&c=moa&idno=ABZ2602.0007.001&view=toc). University of Michigan, 2005 (originally 1854-1860). 

Andrews, Charles McLean. “American Colonial History: 1690-1750.” [Annual Report of the _American Historical Association_ for the Year 1898](https://digitalcommons.law.ou.edu/indianserialset/6997/).  

Andrews, Charles McLean. [_The Colonial Period of American History Vol. 4_](https://archive.org/details/in.ernet.dli.2015.185510/page/n381/mode/2up?q=revolution).  Yale University Press, 1938.

Gipson, Lawrence Henry. “[The American Revolution as an Aftermath of the Great War for the Empire, 1754-1763.](https://www-jstor-org.libproxy.unm.edu/stable/2144276#metadata_info_tab_contents)” _Political Science Quarterly_, vol. 65, no. 1, 1950, pp. 86–104.

Becker, Carl. [_The United States; An Experiment in Democracy_](https://archive.org/details/unitedstatesexpe00beckrich/page/44/mode/2up?q=Revolution).Harper & Brothers, 1915. 

Beard, Charles. [_An Economic Interpretation of the Constitution of the United States_](https://people.tamu.edu/~b-wood/GovtEcon/Beard.pdf). The Macmillan Company, 1913. 

Jensen, Merrill. [_The Articles of Confederation: An Interpretation of the Social-Constitutional History of 
the American Revolution, 1774-1781_](https://www.amazon.com/Articles-Confederation-Interpretation-Social-Constitutional-Revolution/dp/0299002047). University of Wisconsin Press; 1st edition, 1970. 

Adair, Douglas. [ _The Intellectual Origins of Jeffersonian Democracy: Republicanism, The Class Struggle, and the Virtuous Farmer_](https://vdoc.pub/download/the-intellectual-origins-of-jeffersonian-democracy-republicanism-the-class-struggle-and-the-virtuous-farmer-7fdbmbvkuek0). Lexington Books, 1942.

Bailyn, Bernard. [_The Ideological Origins of the American Revolution: Fiftieth Anniversary Edition_](https://web-p-ebscohost-com.libproxy.unm.edu/ehost/detail/detail?vid=2&sid=67859fdf-e403-4687-8ff4-da3f8d33d5d9%40redis&bdata=JnNpdGU9ZWhvc3QtbGl2ZSZzY29wZT1zaXRl#AN=1584203&db=nlebk). Harvard University Press, 2017.

Lemisch, Jesse. “[Jack Tar in the Streets: Merchant Seamen in the Politics of Revolutionary America.](https://www-jstor-org.libproxy.unm.edu/stable/1921773#metadata_info_tab_contents)” _The William and Mary Quarterly_, vol. 25, no. 3, 1968, pp. 371–407.

Norton, Mary Beth. “[The Evolution of White Women’s Experience in Early America.](https://www-jstor-org.libproxy.unm.edu/stable/1856118?seq=22#metadata_info_tab_contents)” _The American Historical Review_, vol. 89, no. 3, 1984, pp. 593–619. 

Nash, Gary B. [_Race and Revolution_](https://unm.on.worldcat.org/search/detail/856934994?queryString=au%3D%22Nash%2C%20Gary%20B%22&clusterResults=true&groupVariantRecords=false&subformat=Book%3A%3Abook_digital&changedFacet=format). 1st ed., 1st ed., Madison House, 1990.

PBS Frontline. [Interview: Joseph Ellis](https://www.pbs.org/wgbh/pages/frontline/shows/jefferson/interviews/ellis.html). 1997. 

Brands, H.W. “[Founders Chic: Our reverence for the Fathers has gotten out of hand.](https://www.theatlantic.com/magazine/archive/2003/09/founders-chic/302773/)” _The Atlantic_, September 2003. 

Hannah-Jones, Nikole. “[Our democracy’s founding ideals were false when they were written. Black Americans have fought to make them true.](https://www.nytimes.com/interactive/2019/08/14/magazine/black-history-american-democracy.html)” _The New York Times_, August 14, 2019. 
